# Values

The following are values for any crates adopted in the `rust-seq` stack.

## Correctness

Most fundamentally, software in the `rust-seq` stack is designed to produce correct
results or to error with reasonable error messages when producing correct results is not
possible. We collectively believe that bioinformatics tools today are unnecessarily
fragile and all too often either (a) silently fail or (b) return unhelpful information
when failures occur. Eliminating these modes of failure in omics development and
analyses is one of the primary reasons the project was created.

To that end, correctness should be considered the highest priority of crates in the
`rust-seq` stackâ€”**even at the cost of performance**.

## Performant

Beyond correctness, performance is the next most fundamental goal of crates within the
`rust-seq` stack. Simply put, if software is not performant, it's unlikely to be widely
adopted and used. As such, there is a high emphasis on optimization and benchmarking for
crates in the `rust-seq` stack. Changes that introduce regressions in performance are
unlikely to be accepted (unless the case is sufficiently demonstrated that a new feature
is worth the cost of a performance hit).  Likewise, if a `rust-seq` create is created to
provide or mimic functionality that is provided in a library within some other language
(e.g. C, C++, Go, etc.), it is expected, in general, that the `rust-seq` implementation
will be similarly (or more) performant than the library providing this functionality in
another language.

## Broadly Usable

Crates in the `rust-seq` stack are intended to be broadly used within academic and
industry. As such, they should be **freely-licensed** to enable them to be adopted used
in the broadest variety of contexts. If you do not have a preference on the license, we
recommend you dual license the crate to be used under the [MIT
License](https://opensource.org/license/MIT) or the [Apache-2.0
License](https://opensource.org/license/apache-2-0) at the user's discretion.

Notably, crates *must* be made accessible under any number of the following licenses (in
alphabetical order):

* [Apache-2.0 License](https://opensource.org/license/apache-2-0)
  (learn about this license [here](https://www.tldrlegal.com/license/apache-license-2-0-apache-2-0)),
* [BSD 3-Clause License](https://opensource.org/license/BSD-3-clause)
  (learn about this license [here](https://www.tldrlegal.com/license/bsd-3-clause-license-revised)),
* [MIT License](https://opensource.org/license/MIT)
  (learn about this license [here](https://www.tldrlegal.com/license/mit-license)),
* or any public domain license (e.g.,
  [Unlicense](https://opensource.org/license/unlicense)).

Crates explicitly *must not* only be available through the following kinds of licenses:

* Any viral/copyleft licenses (any Affero/GPL/LGPL license),
* or anything that stipulates the crate is "free for non-commercial use" (bespoke
  licenses),

If any question is not sufficiently covered by the above license reviews, please [file
an
issue](https://github.com/rust-seq/docs/issues/new?labels=license&title=license:%20evaluation%20of%20LICENSE).

## Contributable

Crates in the `rust-seq` stack are designed to be contributed to the community. Though
one individual may carry the vision for a particular crate in the beginning, it should
be possible for anyone to take a few hours to grok a crate's design, develop a set of
improvements, and then submit those improvements to be considered. Achieving this
uniformly across an ecosystem of crates necessitates many common practices, including:

- All crates are **comprehensively tested** to ensure that code can be modified and
  refactored by non-experts with confidence.
- All crates are **comprehensively linted** to ensure that code is of the highest
  quality possible.
- All crates are **comprehensively documented** to ensure that using the code is clear
  and straightforward. This means (a) ensuring documentation for all public-facing code,
  (b) ensuring documentation for all private code [to ease development in those areas],
  and (c) including examples for any user-facing code to make sure usage is
  straightforward. Note that this can be accomplished largely by enabling the
  [`missing_docs`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/nightly-rustc/rustc_lint/builtin/static.MISSING_DOCS.html),
  [`clippy::missing_docs_in_private_items`](https://rust-lang.github.io/rust-clippy/master/index.html#/missing_docs_in_private_items),
  and
  [`rustdoc::missing_doc_code_examples`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/nightly-rustc/rustdoc/lint/static.MISSING_DOC_CODE_EXAMPLES.html)
  lints.

All of the above should be independently verified and readily reported by continuous
integration processes on PRs to ensure that contributors can iterate asyncronously
towards a common goal-post for contributions. Note that this also builds confidence in
hesitant contributors that they can work without the perception of bothering
maintainers, which is a common discourager of open-source contributions.

## Maintained

Crates in the `rust-seq` stack are _permanent_ commitments to addressing a particular
need in the ecosystem. In particular, they are not "published and forgotten". To that
end, the expectation is that crates will continue to evolve as technology evolves,
providing a first-class experience that's always up to date.

## Stable

Crates in the `rust-seq` stack follow [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/). In
brief, this means that you can immediately look at the version and know the stage of the
project (`v0.y.z` means the crate is still in development and the API is not yet
stable), `v1.y.z` is the first stable release that will always remain backwards
compatible for version starting with `v1`, etc). It also means that software will not
unexpectedly break once you've built on top of a particular dependency (not considering,
of course, when software is in the `v0.y.z` stage).
